.Dd 2024-05-18
.Dt fz-gates 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fz-gates
.Nd A development guide for making your own fz gates.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Gates govern when notifiers execute. They provide a high degree of control over the exact conditions in which an alert may be raised. They base their decisions from the task's metadata received in the environment.
.Pp
Gates are attached to notifiers, which are attached to tasks.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
Gates are executed with metadata of the triggering notifier and the parent task in the environment.
.Bl -tag -width STATE_CHANGED
.It Cm FREQUENCY
The
.Cm frequency
of the task.
.It Cm HISTORY
A uint32 holding the result of the last 32 task executions. Read using bitwise operators; high is
.Cm ok
and low is
.Cm fail .
The least significant bit holds the most recent execution.
.It Cm HISTORY_MASK
A uint32 representing how many of the bits
.CM HISTORY
contains records. This needed to tell how many of the leading zeros are significant. Read using bitwise operators; high represents a measurement and low does not.
.It Cm LAST_STATE
The last stable state. Not to be confused with
.Cm STATE .
The value is calculated by performing a bitwise right-shift on
.Cm HISTORY .
It continues shifting backwards until a stable state is found. This will usually only take one shift;
.Cm LAST_STATE
will equal
.Cm STATE
making
.Cm STATE_CHANGED
be false.
.Op ok, fail
.It Cm LAST_FAIL
The epoch when the task was last in a
.Cm fail
state.
.It Cm LAST_OK
The epoch when the task was last in an
.Cm ok
state.
.It Cm LAST_NOTIFICATION
The epoch when the notifier which the gate is attached lasted sent a notification.
.It Cm PRIORITY
The
.Cm priority
of the task.
.It Cm STATE
The current state of the task. A value of
.Cm unknown
represents a task that is in an unstable state and is executing at its
.Cm retry_interval .
When the value is
.Cm ok
or
.Cm fail
the task is in that stable state.
.Op ok, fail, unknown
.It Cm STATE_CHANGED
Whether
.Cm STATE
matches
.Cm LAST_STATE .
.Op true, false
.It Cm TASK_COMMAND
The
.Cm command
of the task.
.El
.Sh EXIT CODES
The following exit codes are recognised:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width XX
.It Cm 0
The gate is open permitting the notifier to execute.
.El
.Pp
All other exit codes indicate a closed gate.
.Sh CONSIDERATIONS
Gates should be stateless. Rarely, will they depend on more than the
.Cm ENVIRONMENT .
They have a fixed timeout of one second which if exceeded, results in a closed gate and an error logged to the
.Cm log_file .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fz 1 ,
.Xr fz-notifiers 7 ,
.Xr fz-tasks 7
