.Dd 2024-10-26
.Dt fz 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fz
.Nd A highly customisable monitoring daemon
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl n
.Op Fl c Ar file
.Op Fl l Ar error/warn/info/debug
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
daemon is a specialised task scheduler for monitoring. It raises alerts under specific conditions. The scripts themselves are typically shell scripts or small programs. They must adhere to a specific interface, but what they do specifically is up to you.
.Pp
Although some scripts are provided, you are expected and encouraged to write your own making
.Nm
infinitely flexible, though it does require a small amount of programming experience.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl c, Li --config
The configuration file. See
.Xr flamingzombies.toml 5
for details on how it can be configured.
.It Fl C, Li --directory
Change to this directory before executing any script.
.It Fl h, Li --help
Basic usage information.
.It Fl l, Li --loglevel
The log level to set when running the daemon. Valid options are error, warn, info or debug.
.It Fl n, Li --configtest
Test the validity of the supplied configuration.
.Xr flamingzombies.toml 5
for details on how it can be configured.
.It Fl p, Li --pidfile
Path to write the daemons pidfile.
.It Fl V, Li --version
Print the version information.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
Most settings can also be supplied with environment variables, but if a command arguments is provided it will take precedence. The supported environment variables are listed below and closely match the arguments documented above.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic FZ_CONFIG_FILE
.It Ic FZ_DIRECTORY
.It Ic FZ_LISTEN
.It Ic FZ_LOG_LEVEL
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fzctl 1 ,
.Xr flamingzombies.toml 5 ,
.Xr fz-gates 7 ,
.Xr fz-notifiers 7 ,
.Xr fz-tasks 7
.Sh "BUGS"
.Nm fz
is still very immature. I'm sure it contains bugs and it is certainly missing features.
